so in 2011 I altered my name so that I
could participate in far-right youth
camp in Hungary I was doing a PhD
looking at youth political socialization
why young people were developing
political ideologies in a post communist
setting and I saw that a lot of young
people I was talking to we're joining
the far-right and this was astounding to
me so I wanted to enroll in this youth
camp to get a better understanding of
why people were joining so a colleague
enrolled me and my last name sounds a
little bit too Jewish so Erin got turned
into Irina and Saltman got turned into
shoosh which means salty in Hungarian
and in Hungarian your last name goes
first
so my James Bond name turned into salty
Irena which is not something I would
have naturally chosen for myself but
going to this camp I was further shocked
to realize that it was actually really
fun they talked very little about
politics it was mostly learning how to
ride horses shooting a bow and arrow
live music at night free food and
alcohol also some airgun target practice
using mainstream politicians faces as
targets and this seemed like a very
actually friendly inclusive group until
you started talking or mentioning
anything to do with the Roma population
Jewish people or immigrants and then the
discourse would become very hate based
very quickly so it led me into my work
now where we pose the question why do
people join violent extremist movements
and how do we effectively counter these
processes in the aftermath of horrible
atrocities and attacks in places like
Belgium France but all over the world
sometimes it's easier for us to think
well these must be sociopaths these must
be naturally violent individuals they
must have something wrong with their
bringing and what's really tragic is
that oftentimes there's no one profile
many people come from educated
backgrounds different socioeconomic
backgrounds men and women different ages
some with families some single so why
what is this a lure and this is what I
want to talk you through as well as how
do we challenge this in a modern era we
do know through research that there are
quite a number of different things that
affect somebody's process of
radicalization and we categorize these
into push and pull factors and these are
pretty much similar for far-right
neo-nazi groups all the way to Islamist
extremist and terrorist groups and push
factors are basically what makes you
vulnerable to a process of
radicalization to joining a violent
extremist group and these can be a lot
of different things but roughly a sense
of alienation a sense of isolation
questioning your own identity but also
feeling that your in-group is under
attack and your in-group might be based
on a nationality or an ethnicity or
religion and feeling that larger powers
around you're doing nothing to help now
push factors alone do not make you a
violent extremist because if that were
the fact those same factors would go
towards a group like the Roma population
and they're not a violently mobilized
group so we have to look at the pull
factors
what are these violent extremist
organizations offering that other groups
are not offering and actually this is
usually very positive things very
seemingly empowering things such as
Brotherhood and sisterhood and a sense
of belonging as well as giving somebody
a spiritual purpose a divine purpose to
build a utopian society if their goals
can be met but also a sense of
empowerment and adventure when we look
at foreign terrorist fighters we see
young men with the wind in their hair
out in the desert and women going to
join them to have nuptials out in a
sunset it's very romantic and you become
a hero for both men and women that's the
propaganda being given so what extremist
groups are very good at is taking a very
complicated confusing nuanced world and
simplifying that world into black and
white good and evil and you become what
is good challenging what is evil so I
want to talk a little bit about Isis
dodge because they have been a game
changer in how we look at these
processes and through a lot of the
material and their tactics they are very
much a modern movement one of the
aspects is the internet and the usage of
social media as we've all seen in
headlines tweeting and videos of the
heading videos but the internet alone
does not radicalize you the Internet is
a tool you don't go online shopping for
shoes and accidently become a jihadist
however what the Internet does do is it
is a catalyst it provides tools and
scale and rapidity that doesn't exist
elsewhere and with Isis all of a sudden
this idea of a cloaked dark figure of a
jihadist changed for us all of a sudden
we were in their kitchens we saw what
they were eating for dinner
they were tweeting we had foreign
terrorist fighters tweeting in their own
languages we had women going out there
talking about their wedding day talking
about the births of their children out
there we had gaming culture all of a
sudden and references to grand theft
auto being made so all of a sudden they
were homey they became human and the
problem is that trying to counter it
lots of governments and social media
companies just tried to censor how do we
get rid of terrorist content and it
became a cat-and-mouse game where we
would see accounts taken down and they
just come back up and in arrogance
around somebody having a 25th account
and material that was disseminated
everywhere but we also saw a dangerous
trend was that violent extremists know
the rules and regulations of social
media too so we would see a banal
conversation with a recruiter start on a
mainstream platform and at the point at
which that conversation was going to
become illegal they would jump to a
smaller less regulated more encrypted
platform so all of a sudden we couldn't
track where that conversation went so
this is a problem with censorship which
is why we need to develop alternatives
to censorship Isis is also a game
changer because it's state-building it's
not just recruiting combatant
it's trying to build a state and what
that means is all of a sudden your
recruitment model is much more broad
you're not just trying to get fighters
now you need architects engineers
accountants hackers and women we've
actually seen a huge increase of women
going in the last 24 but especially 12
months some countries one in four of the
people going over to join are now women
and so this really changes who we're
trying to counter this process with now
not all doom and gloom so the rest I'd
like to talk about some of the positive
things and the new innovation in trying
to prevent and counter violent extremism
preventing is very different than
countering and actually you can think of
it in medical terms so preventative
medicine is how do we make it so that
you are naturally resilient to this
process of radicalization whereas that
is going to be different if somebody is
already showing a symptom or a sign of
belonging to a violent extremist
ideology and so in preventative measures
we're talking more about really broad
groups of people and exposure to ideas
to make them resilient whereas it's very
different if somebody is starting to
question and agree with certain things
online and it's also very different if
somebody already has a swastika tattoo
and is very much embedded within a group
how do you reach them so I'd like to go
through three examples of each one of
those levels and talk you through what
some of the new ways of engaging with
people are becoming one is extreme
dialogue and it's an educational program
that we helped develop this one is from
Canada and it's meant to create
dialogues within a classroom setting
using storytelling because violent
extremism can be very hard to try to
explain especially to younger
individuals so we have a network of
former extremists and survivors of
extremism that tell their stories
through video and create question giving
to classrooms to start a conversation
about the topic these two examples show
Christian who lost her son who
radicalized and died fighting for Isis
and Daniel is a former neo-nazi who was
an extremely violent neo-nazi and they
posed questions about their lives and
where they're at and regret and force a
classroom to have a dialogue around it
now looking at that middle range of end
of
Jules actually we need a lot of civil
society voices how do you interact with
people that are looking for information
online that are starting to toy with an
ideology that are doing those searching
identity questions how do we provide
alternatives for that and that's when we
combine large groups of civil society
voices with creatives techies app
developers artists comedians and we can
create really specified content and
actually online disseminate it to very
strategic audiences so one example would
be creating a satirical video which
makes fun of Islamophobia and targeting
it to 15 to 20 year-olds online that
have an interest in white power music
and live specifically in Manchester we
can use these marketing tools to be very
specific so that we know when somebody
is viewing watching and engaging with
that content it's not just the average
person it's not me or you it's a very
specific audience that we are looking to
engage with even more downstream we
developed a pilot program called
one-to-one where we took former
extremists and we had them reach out
directly to a group of labeled
neo-fascists as well as Islamist
extremists and put direct messages
through facebook Messenger into their
inbox saying hey I see where you're
going I've been there if you want to
talk I'm here now we kind of expected
death threats from this sort of
interaction it's a little alarming to
have a former neo-nazi say hey how are
you but actually we found that around
60% of the people reached out to
responded and of that around another 60%
had sustained engagement meaning that
they were having conversations with the
hardest people to reach about what they
were going through and planting those
seeds of doubt and giving them
alternatives for talking about these
subjects that's really important so what
we're trying to do is actually bring
unlikely sectors to the table we have
amazing activists all over the world but
oftentimes their messages are not
strategic or they don't actually reach
the audience's they want to reach so we
work with networks of former extremists
we work with networks of young people in
different parts of the world and we work
with them to bring the tech sector to
the table with artists and creatives and
marketing expertise so that we can
actually have a more robust
challenging of extremism that works
together so I would say that if you are
in the audience and you happen to be a
graphic designer
a poet a marketing expert somebody that
works in PR a comedian you might not
think that this is your sector but
actually the skills that you have right
now might be exactly what is needed to
help challenge extremism effectively
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]